ADR 022 - Custom baseapp panic handling (#6072)
cosmos/cosmos-sdk: docs/architecture/adr-022-custom-panic-handling.md

# ADR 022: Custom baseapp panic handling

## Changelog

- 2020 Apr 24: Initial Draft

## Context

Current implementation of BaseApp does not allow developers to write custom error handlers in

> [runTx()](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blob/bad4ca75f58b182f600396ca350ad844c18fc80b/baseapp/baseapp.go#L538)

Author: [Our project](https://github.com/dfinance/dnode) uses a virtual machine (for smart contracts compilation/execution) as a sidecar service and it is essential that node - VM connectivity stays stable for TXs processing. So when the communication breaks we need to crash the node and reboot it once the problem is solved. As all `keeper` panics are caught by `runTx`'s `defer()` handler, we have to adjust the `baseapp` code to customize it.

> [runTx()](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blob/bad4ca75f58b182f600396ca350ad844c18fc80b/baseapp/baseapp.go#L538)

Reviewer: Can you add this as a written example?

method. We think that this method can be more flexible and can give SDK users more options for customizations without
the need to rewrite whole BaseApp. Also there's one special case for `sdk.ErrorOutOfGas` error which feels like dirty

> hack in non-flexible environment.

Author: Done

## Decision

### Design

#### Overview

Instead of hardcoding custom error handling into BaseApp we suggest using set of middlewares which can be customized
externally and will allow developers use as many custom error handlers as they want. Implementation with tests
can be found [here](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/pull/6053).

#### Implementation details

##### RecoveryHandler

We add a `recover()` object handler type:

```go
type RecoveryHandler func(recoveryObj interface{}) error
```

This handler receives an object, processes it and returns contextually enriched `error` or `nil`
if object is not a handle's target type.

An example:

```go
func(recoveryObj interface{}) error {
    err, ok := recoveryObj.(error)
    if !ok { return nil }
    
    if someSpecificError.Is(err) {
        panic(customPanicMsg)
    } else {
        return nil
    }
}
```

This example breaks the application execution, but it also might enrich the error's context like the `OutOfGas` handler.

##### RecoveryMiddleware

We also add a middleware type:

```go
type recoveryMiddleware func(recoveryObj interface{}) (recoveryMiddleware, error)
```

> Function receives a `recover()` object and returns (`next middleware`, `nil`) if object wasn't handled (not a target type)

Reviewer 2: since this looks like the modular anteHandler (ADR10) I think it deserves a mention for comparison. 👍

`OutOfGas` middleware example:
```go
func newRecoveryMiddleware(handler RecoveryHandler, next recoveryMiddleware) recoveryMiddleware {
    return func(recoveryObj interface{}) (recoveryMiddleware, error) {
        if err := handler(recoveryObj); err != nil {
            return nil, err
        }
        return next, nil
    }
}

func newOutOfGasRecoveryMiddleware(gasWanted uint64, ctx sdk.Context, next recoveryMiddleware) recoveryMiddleware {
    handler := func(recoveryObj interface{}) error {
        err, ok := recoveryObj.(sdk.ErrorOutOfGas)
        if !ok { return nil }

        return sdkerrors.Wrap(
            sdkerrors.ErrOutOfGas, fmt.Sprintf(
                "out of gas in location: %v; gasWanted: %d, gasUsed: %d", err.Descriptor, gasWanted, ctx.GasMeter().GasConsumed(),
            ),
        )
    }
    
    return newRecoveryMiddleware(handler, next)
}
```

##### Recovery processing

Basic chain of middlewares processing would look like:

```go
func processRecovery(recoveryObj interface{}, middleware recoveryMiddleware) error {
	if middleware == nil { return nil }

	next, err := middleware(recoveryObj)
	if err != nil { return err }

> 	if next != nil { return processRecovery(recoveryObj, next) }
> 
> 	return nil

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
	if next == nil { return nil }

	return processRecovery(recoveryObj, next)
```

}
```

That way we can create a middleware chain which is executed from left to right, the rightmost middleware is a
`default` handler which must return an `error`.

> ##### Baseapp changes

Reviewer 2: I assume this will be set through a baseapp option on the application constructor? I'd add that section too.

> The default middleware chain must exist in a `baseapp` object and developers can add their custom `RecoveryHandler`s:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The default middleware chain must exist in a `BaseApp` object and developers can add their custom `RecoveryHandler`s:
```

Author: An example added

```go

> func (app *BaseApp) AddRunTxRecoveryHandler(handlers ...RecoveryHandler)

Reviewer 2: complete this function for more context

```

This method would prepend handlers to an existing chain.

## Status

Proposed

## Consequences

### Positive

- Developers of Cosmos SDK based projects can add custom panic handlers to:
    * add error context for custom panic sources (panic inside of custom keepers);
    * emit `panic()`: passthrough recovery object to the Tendermint core;
    * other necessary handling;
- Developers can use standard Cosmos SDK `baseapp` implementation, rather that rewriting it in their projects;
- Proposed solution doesn't break the current "standard" `runTx()` flow;

### Negative

- Introduces changes to the execution model design.

### Neutral

- `OutOfGas` error handler becomes one of the middlewares;
- Default panic handler becomes one of the middlewares;

> ## References

Reviewer 2: add a reference to `ADR 010: Modular AnteHandler`

might be handled in a "standard" way (middleware) alongside the others.

We propose middleware-solution, which could help developers implement the following cases:
* add external logging (let's say sending reports to external services like [Sentry](https://sentry.io));
* call panic for specific error cases;

It will also make `OutOfGas` case and `default` case one of the middlewares.
`Default` case wraps recovery object to an error and logs it ([example middleware implementation](#Recovery-middleware)).

## Decision

### Design

#### Overview

Instead of hardcoding custom error handling into BaseApp we suggest using set of middlewares which can be customized
externally and will allow developers use as many custom error handlers as they want. Implementation with tests
can be found [here](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/pull/6053).

#### Implementation details

##### Recovery handler

We add a `recover()` object handler type:

```go
type RecoveryHandler func(recoveryObj interface{}) error
```

This handler receives an object, processes it and returns contextually enriched `error` or `nil`

> if object is not a handle's target type.

Reviewer 3: Describe when `error` is returned and when `nil` is returned, the latter part of the sentence makes me confused. Idk when which will be returned.

Author: Updated:
```
`recoveryObj` is a return value of `recover()` function.
Handler should type assert (or other methods) an object to define if object should be handled.
`nil` should be returned if input object can't be handled by that `RecoveryHandler` (not a handler's target type).
Not `nil` error should be returned if input object was handled and middleware chain execution should be stopped.
```

An example:

```go

> func(recoveryObj interface{}) error {

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
func exampleErrHandler(recoveryObj interface{}) error {
```

    err, ok := recoveryObj.(error)
    if !ok { return nil }
    
    if someSpecificError.Is(err) {
        panic(customPanicMsg)
    } else {
        return nil
    }
}
```

This example breaks the application execution, but it also might enrich the error's context like the `OutOfGas` handler.

##### Recovery middleware

> We also add a middleware type:

Reviewer 3: Example why we're adding middleware (i.e. decorator) and how it relates to the previously mentioned handlers.

Author: Updated:
```We also add a middleware type (decorator). That function type wraps `RecoveryHandler` and returns next middleware in
execution chain and handler's `error`. Type is used to separate actual `recovery()` object handling from middleware
chain processing.```

```go
type recoveryMiddleware func(recoveryObj interface{}) (recoveryMiddleware, error)

func newRecoveryMiddleware(handler RecoveryHandler, next recoveryMiddleware) recoveryMiddleware {
    return func(recoveryObj interface{}) (recoveryMiddleware, error) {
        if err := handler(recoveryObj); err != nil {
            return nil, err
        }
        return next, nil
    }
}
```

Function receives a `recover()` object and returns (`next middleware`, `nil`) if object wasn't handled (not a target type)

> or (`nil`, `error`) if input object was handled and other middlewares in the chain should not be executed.

Reviewer 3: We should note here that `error` itself can be nil, correct? Or will it always be an error?

Author: Description updated:
```
Function receives a `recover()` object and returns:
* (next `recoveryMiddleware`, `nil`) if object wasn't handled (not a target type) by `RecoveryHandler`;
* (`nil`, not nil `error`) if input object was handled and other middlewares in the chain should not be executed;
* (`nil`, `nil`) this is an invalid behaviour 'cause in that case panic recovery might not be properly handled;
This can be avoided by always using a `default` as a rightmost middleware in chain (always returns an `error`'); 
```

# ADR 022: Custom BaseApp panic handling

## Changelog

- 2020 Apr 24: Initial Draft

## Context

> Current implementation of BaseApp does not allow developers to write custom error handlers in

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The current implementation of BaseApp does not allow developers to write custom error handlers during panic recovery
```

method. We think that this method can be more flexible and can give SDK users more options for customizations without
the need to rewrite whole BaseApp. Also there's one special case for `sdk.ErrorOutOfGas` error handling, that case
might be handled in a "standard" way (middleware) alongside the others.

We propose middleware-solution, which could help developers implement the following cases:
* add external logging (let's say sending reports to external services like [Sentry](https://sentry.io));
* call panic for specific error cases;

It will also make `OutOfGas` case and `default` case one of the middlewares.
`Default` case wraps recovery object to an error and logs it ([example middleware implementation](#Recovery-middleware)).

## Decision

### Design

#### Overview

Instead of hardcoding custom error handling into BaseApp we suggest using set of middlewares which can be customized
externally and will allow developers use as many custom error handlers as they want. Implementation with tests
can be found [here](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/pull/6053).

#### Implementation details

##### Recovery handler

> We add a `recover()` object handler type:

Reviewer 3: It's not clear what `recover()` is in this context. Where is defined? How is it used? I find this difficult to understand.

Author: `recover()` is a standard Go function which return `interface{}`. I will add a note like `recover() === recovery object`

```go
type RecoveryHandler func(recoveryObj interface{}) error
```

`recoveryObj` is a return value of `recover()` function.
Handler should type assert (or other methods) an object to define if object should be handled.
`nil` should be returned if input object can't be handled by that `RecoveryHandler` (not a handler's target type).
Not `nil` error should be returned if input object was handled and middleware chain execution should be stopped.

An example:

```go
func exampleErrHandler(recoveryObj interface{}) error {
    err, ok := recoveryObj.(error)
    if !ok { return nil }
    
    if someSpecificError.Is(err) {
        panic(customPanicMsg)
    } else {
        return nil
    }
}
```

This example breaks the application execution, but it also might enrich the error's context like the `OutOfGas` handler.

##### Recovery middleware

We also add a middleware type (decorator). That function type wraps `RecoveryHandler` and returns next middleware in

> execution chain and handler's `error`. Type is used to separate actual `recovery()` object handling from middleware

Reviewer 3: ```
Type is used to separate actual `recovery()` object handling from middleware
chain processing.
```

I find this difficult to understand. What type? What is `recovery()`? How is the separation happening/defined?

Reviewer 3: It seems there is conflated usage between `recoveryObj` and `recovery()`. I'd suggest stacking with `recoveryObj` and `RecoveryHandler` that accepts it.

chain processing.

```go
type recoveryMiddleware func(recoveryObj interface{}) (recoveryMiddleware, error)

func newRecoveryMiddleware(handler RecoveryHandler, next recoveryMiddleware) recoveryMiddleware {
    return func(recoveryObj interface{}) (recoveryMiddleware, error) {
        if err := handler(recoveryObj); err != nil {
            return nil, err
        }
        return next, nil
    }
}
```

Function receives a `recover()` object and returns:
* (next `recoveryMiddleware`, `nil`) if object wasn't handled (not a target type) by `RecoveryHandler`;
* (`nil`, not nil `error`) if input object was handled and other middlewares in the chain should not be executed;

> * (`nil`, `nil`) this is an invalid behaviour 'cause in that case panic recovery might not be properly handled;

Reviewer 3: This can happen when there is not handler that accepts/knows about a given `recoveryObj`, right? We should prohibit this. We can, for instance, always append/ensure a correct "terminator" handler exists at the end. Kind of like a fail-safe.

Author: Yes you are right. On `BaseApp` creation (default constructor) default middleware is always created, so this situation won't happen actually. I'll make a note about this.

Author: Actually that has been already mentioned in the "BaseApp changes" section.

This can be avoided by always using a `default` as a rightmost middleware in chain (always returns an `error`'); 

`OutOfGas` middleware example:
```go
func newOutOfGasRecoveryMiddleware(gasWanted uint64, ctx sdk.Context, next recoveryMiddleware) recoveryMiddleware {
    handler := func(recoveryObj interface{}) error {
        err, ok := recoveryObj.(sdk.ErrorOutOfGas)
        if !ok { return nil }

        return sdkerrors.Wrap(
            sdkerrors.ErrOutOfGas, fmt.Sprintf(
                "out of gas in location: %v; gasWanted: %d, gasUsed: %d", err.Descriptor, gasWanted, ctx.GasMeter().GasConsumed(),
            ),
        )
    }
    
    return newRecoveryMiddleware(handler, next)
}
```

> 

Reviewer 3: I think adding `OutOfGas` and `Default` examples here out of the blue make this ADR hard to read and a bit confusing. I'd avoid them or change how you want to show the concrete changes to baseapp.

Author: I think the "BaseApp changes" section should be preserved as it shows how exactly the whole idea works: creating a `default` middleware and embedding it to the panic recovery section (`runTx` method).
Regarding middleware examples. I'm not sure about removing them too, as those functions are used in examples ("BaseApp changes" for instance). But I do believe you're more experienced in ADR design and I can remove those if needed.

# ADR 022: Custom BaseApp panic handling

## Changelog

- 2020 Apr 24: Initial Draft

## Context

The current implementation of BaseApp does not allow developers to write custom error handlers during panic recovery
[runTx()](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blob/bad4ca75f58b182f600396ca350ad844c18fc80b/baseapp/baseapp.go#L539)
method. We think that this method can be more flexible and can give SDK users more options for customizations without
the need to rewrite whole BaseApp. Also there's one special case for `sdk.ErrorOutOfGas` error handling, that case
might be handled in a "standard" way (middleware) alongside the others.

We propose middleware-solution, which could help developers implement the following cases:

> * add external logging (let's say sending reports to external services like [Sentry](https://sentry.io));

Reviewer: I do not understand how this would work. Would every node make an HTTP call to Sentry?

Author: Those are examples of how developers can use those middlewares. They can send panic logs to Sentry if they need to or do other struf needed.

Reviewer: I still don't understand how Sentry would be used in a replicated state machine.

Author: Those are just examples of what developers of Cosmos SDK based project could use those handlers for. May be they want to get notifications on every `panic()` event (Sentry), that doesn't collide with state machine ideology.

Reviewer: The issue is that (in a production blockchain) the state machine is *replicated*, so many copies of every error would be sent to Sentry, and you would need to be careful to ensure that making HTTP requests doesn't introduce non-determinism. It's an alright example, but these points need to be clarified.

Author: Actually Sentry can aggregate multiple similar event into one issue with some meta and statistics. As for non-deterministic behavior: developers can do that in so many ways including the proposed middlewares =)

Reviewer: That's nice. The determinism bit is more important. I think it would be sufficient if we add a warning that middlewares must be deterministic, or consensus safety will be lost.

> * call panic for specific error cases;

Reviewer: Like what? Why would you want to panic during transaction execution instead of reverting? Can you give an example?

Author: https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/pull/6072#discussion_r414756015

Reviewer: Can you add that as a written (more detailed) example?

Author: I don't get you. You want me to add our use case as an example to the ADR?

Reviewer: Yes, please do.

Author: Added: https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/pull/6072/commits/bf1cbdf259bebd624a74bb28360de3b131c74e53

## Decision

### Design

#### Overview

Instead of hardcoding custom error handling into BaseApp we suggest using set of middlewares which can be customized
externally and will allow developers use as many custom error handlers as they want. Implementation with tests
can be found [here](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/pull/6053).

#### Implementation details

##### Recovery handler

New `RecoveryHandler` type added. `recoveryObj` input argument is an object returned by the standard Go function
`recover()` from the `builtin` package.

```go
type RecoveryHandler func(recoveryObj interface{}) error
```

Handler should type assert (or other methods) an object to define if object should be handled.
`nil` should be returned if input object can't be handled by that `RecoveryHandler` (not a handler's target type).
Not `nil` error should be returned if input object was handled and middleware chain execution should be stopped.

An example:

```go
func exampleErrHandler(recoveryObj interface{}) error {
    err, ok := recoveryObj.(error)
    if !ok { return nil }
    

>     if someSpecificError.Is(err) {
>         panic(customPanicMsg)
>     } else {
>         return nil
>     }

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    if someSpecificError.Is(err) {
         // panic or custom error message (eg: wrapping)
        panic(customPanicMsg)
    }
    return err
```

Author: That is not correct. If handler can't process `recoveryObj` it should return `nil` rather than passing through error to the next middleware.

}
```

This example breaks the application execution, but it also might enrich the error's context like the `OutOfGas` handler.

##### Recovery middleware

> We also add a middleware type (decorator). That function type wraps `RecoveryHandler` and returns next middleware in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We also add a middleware type (decorator). That function type wraps `RecoveryHandler` and returns the next middleware in
```

> execution chain and handler's `error`. Type is used to separate actual `recovery()` object handling from middleware

Reviewer 2: > Type is used to separate actual `recovery()` object handling from middleware chain processing.

I don't understand what "Type" means in this context

Author: Golang type.

chain processing.

```go
type recoveryMiddleware func(recoveryObj interface{}) (recoveryMiddleware, error)

func newRecoveryMiddleware(handler RecoveryHandler, next recoveryMiddleware) recoveryMiddleware {
    return func(recoveryObj interface{}) (recoveryMiddleware, error) {
        if err := handler(recoveryObj); err != nil {
            return nil, err
        }
        return next, nil
    }
}
```

Function receives a `recoveryObj` object and returns:
* (next `recoveryMiddleware`, `nil`) if object wasn't handled (not a target type) by `RecoveryHandler`;

> * (`nil`, not nil `error`) if input object was handled and other middlewares in the chain should not be executed;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `nil, err`: if input object was handled and other middlewares in the chain should not be executed;
```

Author: The `err` value might be nil. Here I intentionally mention the non-nil case.

> * (`nil`, `nil`) this is an invalid behaviour 'cause in that case panic recovery might not be properly handled;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `nil, nil`: in case of invalid behavior. Panic recovery might not have been properly handled;
```

> this can be avoided by always using a `default` as a rightmost middleware in chain (always returns an `error`'); 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
this can be avoided by always using a `default` as a rightmost middleware in the chain (always returns an `error`'); 
```

    handler := func(recoveryObj interface{}) error {
        return sdkerrors.Wrap(
            sdkerrors.ErrPanic, fmt.Sprintf("recovered: %v\nstack:\n%v", recoveryObj, string(debug.Stack())),
        )
    }
    
    return newRecoveryMiddleware(handler, nil)
}
```

##### Recovery processing

Basic chain of middlewares processing would look like:

```go
func processRecovery(recoveryObj interface{}, middleware recoveryMiddleware) error {
	if middleware == nil { return nil }

	next, err := middleware(recoveryObj)
	if err != nil { return err }
	if next == nil { return nil }

	return processRecovery(recoveryObj, next)
}
```

That way we can create a middleware chain which is executed from left to right, the rightmost middleware is a
`default` handler which must return an `error`.

##### BaseApp changes

The `default` middleware chain must exist in a `BaseApp` object. `Baseapp` modifications:

```go
type BaseApp struct {
    // ...
    runTxRecoveryMiddleware recoveryMiddleware
}

func NewBaseApp(...) {
    // ...
    app.runTxRecoveryMiddleware = newDefaultRecoveryMiddleware()
}

func (app *BaseApp) runTx(...) {
    // ...
    defer func() {
        if r := recover(); r != nil {

>             recoveryMW := newOutOfGasRecoveryMiddleware(gasWanted, ctx, app.runTxRecoveryMiddleware)

Reviewer 4: Why are we hard-coding `newOutOfGasRecoveryMiddleware` into `BaseApp`? I thought the idea was to defer to `app.runTxRecoveryMiddleware`?

Author: That is because `OutOfGas` error handling needs some extra context and can't be statically created.

            err, result = processRecovery(r, recoveryMW), nil
        }

        gInfo = sdk.GasInfo{GasWanted: gasWanted, GasUsed: ctx.GasMeter().GasConsumed()}
    }()
    // ...
}
```

> Developers can add their custom `RecoveryHandler`s:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Developers can add their custom `RecoveryHandler`s by providing `AddRunTxRecoveryHandler` as a BaseApp option parameter to the `NewBaseapp` constructor:
```

chain processing.

```go
type recoveryMiddleware func(recoveryObj interface{}) (recoveryMiddleware, error)

func newRecoveryMiddleware(handler RecoveryHandler, next recoveryMiddleware) recoveryMiddleware {
    return func(recoveryObj interface{}) (recoveryMiddleware, error) {
        if err := handler(recoveryObj); err != nil {
            return nil, err
        }
        return next, nil
    }
}
```

Function receives a `recoveryObj` object and returns:
* (next `recoveryMiddleware`, `nil`) if object wasn't handled (not a target type) by `RecoveryHandler`;
* (`nil`, not nil `error`) if input object was handled and other middlewares in the chain should not be executed;
* (`nil`, `nil`) in case of invalid behavior. Panic recovery might not have been properly handled;
this can be avoided by always using a `default` as a rightmost middleware in the chain (always returns an `error`'); 

`OutOfGas` middleware example:
```go
func newOutOfGasRecoveryMiddleware(gasWanted uint64, ctx sdk.Context, next recoveryMiddleware) recoveryMiddleware {
    handler := func(recoveryObj interface{}) error {
        err, ok := recoveryObj.(sdk.ErrorOutOfGas)

>         if !ok { return nil }

Reviewer 5: Should middleware decorators simply pass `recoveryObj` along to the next middleware if it isn't an error they handle instead of returning?

Author: Actually they do. The example above creates a `handler` and passes it to `func newRecoveryMiddleware` which creates a middleware. That way developer only needs to create a `RecoveryHandler` (which only return an `error` / `nil`). The rest is done with helper functions automatically.

# ADR 022: Custom baseapp panic handling

## Changelog

- 2020 Apr 24: Initial Draft

## Context

Current implementation of BaseApp does not allow developers to write custom error handlers in

> [runTx()](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blob/bad4ca75f58b182f600396ca350ad844c18fc80b/baseapp/baseapp.go#L538)

Reviewer 3: I'd pin to a specific version instead of a commit hash 👍

method. We think that this method can be more flexible and can give SDK users more options for customizations without
the need to rewrite whole BaseApp. Also there's one special case for `sdk.ErrorOutOfGas` error which feels like dirty
hack in non-flexible environment.

> We propose middleware-solution, which could help developers implement following cases:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We propose middleware-solution, which could help developers implement the following cases:

```

* add external logging (let's say sending reports to external services like Sentry);
* call panic for specific error cases;

> It will also make `OutOfGas` case and `default` case one of the middlewares.

Reviewer 3: I'd describe what the `default` case is.

Reviewer 2: > It will also make `OutOfGas` case and `default` case one of the middlewares.

Is this the first middleware?  "`default` case" sounds like a switch statement.

## Decision

### Design

Instead of hardcoding custom error handling into BaseApp we suggest using set of middlewares which can be customized
externally and will allow developers use as many custom error handlers as they want.

> Implementation is already proposed [here](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/pull/6053).

Reviewer 4: I know it's annoying, but generally in an ADR we would explain the design and rationale here even if there's another PR that shows the design in code. This allows us to better reason through alternatives.

Author: Ok, I'll update the design description.

> Implementation is already proposed [here](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/pull/6053).

Reviewer 3: Great idea linking to the PR for reference. But I'd recommend actually stating the proposed APIs and logic here (in addition). It can be generalized and pseudo-code if you wish 👍
